+++
title = "bAdari-view"
+++

Mīsū 3.1.3 states the view of the anti-Jamini Mīmāmsā philosopher Bādari. On this view, only substances, qualities and purificatory acts are to be considered as being subservient to sacrifice, result and a person. In other words, sacrifice, the result and a person do not become subservient to anything because they do not serve the purpose of anything. By contrast, the triad of substances, etc. render assistance to other things and hence are to be treated as subsidiaries. Under MīSū 3.1.4 Jaimini mentions his own view that even actions are subsidiaries since they serve the purpose of the result by bringing about the latter. 

Further on Bādari's view, as elaborated by Śabara, the act of sacrifice does not produce the result, and the result follows on its own once the sacrifice has been brought about. This also means that the result is not causally produced by the act of sacrifice. The implication of this view is that Vedic injunctions which apparently mention results like svarga, cattle, son, village, etc. do not point out to a causal relationship between the prescribed act of sacrifice and the results mentioned in the injunction. As a corollary to this view, such phrases in Vedic injunctions as ‘svargakāma', etc. do not express the eligible performer (adhikārin), but only the agent (kartṛ), because eligibility means ownership of action via the ownership of result, and these two ownerships can be logically connected with one another if and only if the action is held to be the means to achieve the result. This view is categorically identified as belonging to Bādari and some Vaiyākaraṇas by Prabhākara in Bṛhatī ad ŚāBhā ad MīSū 6.1.1. Prabhākara also uses the label of ‘kriyāvākyārthapakṣa' for this view in the said portion of his Bṛhatī. Nārāyaṇa, a commentator of Mandana Miśra's Bhāvanāviveka (BhaVi) calls these philosophers 'Purusaviseṣaṇavādins' in so far as they hold that phrases like 'svargakāma' refer to the agent and hence merely qualify the person. 

This runs counter to the view of Śabara and Kumārila that given that no rational person undertakes any activity which lacks a desired result, such phrases indicate the result which is produced by the performance of the prescribed action and refer to the eligible performer. Bādari's view also stands in contradiction to view of Prabhakara. According to Prabhakara, desire (kāma) mentioned in such phrases stipulate the object of desire, and the phrase plays a role in identifying the person who is fit to be enjoined (niyojyaviśeṣaṇa). For Prabhākara, an injunction needs the person to be enjoined and this is obtained by a reference to such phrases as 'svargakāma', but it does not speak of any means-end relation which may obtain between the prescribed act of sacrifice and svarga. The role of desire is merely to stipulate the person who is fit to be enjoined, whose sense of duty with regard to the prescribed act is activated as a result and he undertakes it. But for Prabhākara, an injunction itself require the result for carrying out its task of instigation because it does so through its own might. Otherwise, the Vedas would not be an independent instrument of knowledge (pramāṇa) in so far as they would be dependent on the result which can be also obtained from other instruments of knowledge like perception, inference, postulation, etc. Thus, while both Bādari and Prabhākara agree that a person acts on the basis of the authority of the Vedic injunctions and that performance of actions prescribed by Vedic injunctions do not causally lead to any ...
